i think there's something to be said for
the sounds
the rather rustic sounds of making a
podcast recording outside
rather than choosing to be all refined
inside of a studio
uh you might be thinking there's
something to be said for how terrible it
sounds
whatever the case this is just a brief
response to sam harris's latest
epic podcast on the topic of free will
sam and i have both been engaged
with making many many remarks and many
postings
on this topic sam of course has written
a book
defending the thesis that free will does
not exist and i think
that remains the best defense of that
position
so towards the beginning of the podcast
sam seems to start by speaking about the
feeling of free will
now this is consistent with the way in
which sam
speaks about many other topics
epistemology for example is often about
belief or about confidence or about
certainty
morality is about the feeling of
well-being or simply happiness or
other kinds of emotions i think that
concentrating upon
feelings and emotions when it comes to
objective matters of truth can be
misleading
it's not that feelings and emotions are
entirely irrelevant to any of these
discussions
and of course our most valuable
important and important experiences as
human beings
certainly do come down to the way in
which we
feel about those experiences that we
have
joyful experiences are the most
profoundly positive parts of our lives
terrifying saddening
rage filled moments are among the worst
kinds of experiences that humans can
have
but i think because emotions
are the very thing that cause us
distraction
moment to moment are the things that
occupy our minds moment to moment so
often
it can cause some philosophers to see
them
as significant not only for the personal
lives of human beings
but also objectively important in their
own right
in the sense that they have significance
not only for individual human lives
but for the way in which
knowledge is created what makes moral
claims true or false or indeed in this
case
whether or not an abstract reality
of free will exists or not
that it comes down to whether an
individual has a perception
of that particular thing or not that
particular concept or not
and that lacking that particular feeling
sensational perception or indeed
experience of
let's say free will in this case would
mean that the free will
does not exist that because you do not
have the perception of free will
then therefore free will does not exist
i want to say that this is a kind of
epistemological error and it leads to an
ontological error it leads to one
saying that therefore a certain thing
doesn't exist
by virtue of the fact one doesn't have
an experience
of it free will to my mind is not
primarily about the experience although
i can defend the idea and i have done so
that free will is an experience that one
can have so let's just flag that up
front that i think that
just because someone searches for a
thing x
and fails to find it does not mean that
thing
x does not exist how many religious
people have made this claim with respect
to atheists that just because they the
religious person
cannot show you god that does not mean
god does not exist
now i'm an atheist but i think it's a
fair point
that if your argument is just because
you haven't found it
doesn't mean that thing doesn't exist
there are many such things in this
category
just an interlude which i've recorded
after doing the rest of that podcast
it's one of these things where talking
about these issues
frequently enough you tend to think
certain things go without saying but i
think that this
probably doesn't go without saying but
one
example of something in this category
where of course
if you well not one example of a thing
in this category many such things in
this category
things which you don't have direct
experience of but which you know exist
is just about everything in science just
about everything of interest in science
is not something that we have direct
access to
not something that we can see and simply
saying you can't see that you can't
observe that therefore it doesn't exist
would be a ridiculous non-sequitur
for example we do not see
the big bang but we know the big bang
must have existed as an event
a big bang happened 13.7 billion years
ago we know that
but no one can see no one can observe
the big bang what we observe
is the cosmic microwave background
radiation 13.7 billion years later
we observe the hubble expansion of the
universe galaxies redshifted moving
apart one from another we observe the
ratio of hydrogen to helium
okay we don't observe we don't see
no one has an experience of a perception
of dinosaurs we
have the experience of patterns in rocks
that we call
fossils no one typically has the
experience of
actually observing atoms but we know
they're there
no one has the experience or will have
the experience even in principle given
what we know about science of
literally the fusion reactions taking
place inside the sun right now
that causes the light to fall upon the
surface of the earth
what we instead have is an experience of
light falling upon the surface of the
earth and then a
very long chain of explanation
stretching all the way from here at the
earth
to the surface of the sun and then into
the internal workings of the core of the
sun
in other words we explain the scene
in terms of the unseen we explain the
observed in terms of the unobserved so
we need to keep
that in mind as we move forward in this
podcast that
either having an observation or not
is not the thing which cashes out
whether or not something is
true in reality the purpose of an
observation
is as a criticism of a particular theory
that's what observations do
and in the ideal case we have two
competing theories
and the observations can decide between
them
and when we talk about this free will
issue what we're going to have to decide
is what is a
good explanation for example of people's
behaviour
because that's really what we're trying
to figure out here why is it that people
choose to do one thing rather than
another now we can try and deny the
existence of free will
which i find rather synonymous with the
capacity to create explanations
for reasons beyond scope of what i'm
saying here and now
there are various other links that i'll
provide beneath the video the youtube
version of this
to my other writings on this topic where
i suggest
following some of the things that are
said in the beginning of infinity
that perhaps consciousness free will
the creative capacity of human beings
all of this stuff
all quite mysterious maybe tied up
together
to be one single overarching mysterious
quality
at the moment mysterious quality of
people that makes them qualitatively
different
to other animal species that exist on
the planet and
one convenient way of talking is simply
free will
okay so back to the main part of the
podcast now
now there are other reasons we might
reject god let's say of supernatural
beings it's not merely on the basis
that we can't find them that we don't
have evidence for them
but rather no explanation is improved
by postulating their existence and
that's the reason ultimately
that we dismiss certain entities as
existing
if an entity is posited to exist but
serves no explanatory purpose then
it's metaphysical baggage and we can do
away with it
when it comes to free will some people
might
claim that they have no experience of
free will
others might say they do have an
experience of free will
and we're at loggerheads we can only
appeal to our internal subjective states
but free will stands apart from this
claim
free will is an explanation of what
people do
and why and we will come to this i've
talked at length about this and written
at length about this in various places
and i think the strongest argument that
remains is that
that free will is this emergent abstract
concept
now abstractions have physical effects
in the real world
this is shown by david deutscher's
wonderful
winston churchill copper atom argument
that appears in the fabric of reality
i've talked about that before elsewhere
and if i repeat it again now it's going
to be
for about the 10th time so i won't bore
listeners with that again
please see the other podcast linked to
alongside of this one
for the winston churchill copper atom
argument
now sam says that removing free will
from
our epistemology our morality or just
broadly our philosophy
means that we will no longer have a
rational
basis for hating people but i think we
can have
free will and yet still have no rational
basis for
hating people as we say
for those of us who subscribe to some of
the ideas in the beginning of infinity
what a person is is an explainer
a special kind of explainer they're a
universal explainer
that essentially shouldn't say
essentially but
what we can explain a person to be is an
explanation generator
that's what they do we model the
universe we try and figure out what's
going on
we're a problem solver there are many
synonyms which
all mean roughly the same thing point in
the same direction as to what a
person really is and given that
description of what a person is that
explanation of what a person is
one need not hate other people even if
people behave
badly if they have bad ideas we can hate
those ideas we can direct our hatred
towards particular ideas but people
should not be identified
with the ideas they have now
sam is an expert at having
people think carefully about their
inner state their inner thoughts their
subjective experience of the world
in other words what it's like to be
conscious
and these thought experiments he
attempts to reveal
to the listener or to the reader in some
cases
that not only is free will an illusion
an illusion but that that the entire
concept of free will is a non-starter it
is
incoherent from the get go
okay so let me turn this around
on sam i think that this is
rather like arguing that
cars don't exist now this seems absurd
but of course if
you are somebody who subscribes to the
notion of
free will if you think you really do
have
the sensation of free will and someone a
professional philosopher says that you
do not
then it can seem to be just as absurd to
be told
that free will is an incoherent concept
so
i want you to reflect for a moment
about how you get from a to b
in the morning let's say as you go to
work and presuming you
drive to work so think about your
journey you're off to work
in the morning and you go out
into the garage or wherever the car
happens to be parked
and you start your engine and you you
have an experience what you think is an
experience of the
car taking you from your driveway
along back streets and perhaps highways
to finally ending up in the parking bay
of your office or wherever your
workplace happens to be
now to most people this makes it seem
like the car really has been the reason
why you made it to work but
i want to say that there really is no
place in reality
for the car there is no car
that was an illusion the entire concept
of the car is actually incoherent
in fact all there has been in terms of
our
not only scientific understanding but
your subjective
sensation of what's going on are
combustion reactions
although in many cases a lithium-ion
redox reactions if you've got an
electric car at tesla
it's basically the conversion of
chemical energy of a kind
into kinetic energy matter undergoing
transformations to say that it was the
car that got you from
a to b is to ignore so much of what we
know
both objectively as a matter of science
and subjectively what you're
experiencing
what you're experiencing are the sounds
these are the sounds
of combustion reactions or of chemical
reactions
these are the sounds of chemistry
becoming movement and emotion
we might even say that everything we
know about chemistry and physics
to this point tells us that something
like the car isn't real it's just a
convenient way that some people have of
speaking but it's
terribly misleading in fact it's worse
than that it's a lie and it's a lie
because
the car itself is a fictional term
invented by people
labeling nothing that is truly there
this and now if you think i'm being
facetious i just want you to reflect on
what we know
about relativity even galilean
relativity because there is a deeper
truth lurking here and the deeper truth
is that there is a
there is simply a continuum of matter
between you and the rest of the universe
and relative motion
tells us that it is just as reasonable
to say that you remain stationary and
the entire universe moved about you
until you found yourself at point b
and this is the sense in which the car
really is
illusory and did not move you from a to
b
and how trying to invoke it as a reason
why
you found yourself no longer at a but
instead of
b is to be hypnotized by a kind of
history of superstitious thinking on
this front the car itself indeed didn't
arise
spontaneously it hasn't always always
been there
it came from the earth via a long chain
of causation
okay so perhaps i am lacking some
generosity in the story i've just told
about the car
but of course i don't think that sam has
grappled with the idea of
emergence or higher level causation
or possibly top down causation
things in the causal chain are still
causes
just because there are events
prior to the goings on in my mind does
not mean
that goings on in my mind are not the
reason
for my behavior and a convenient way of
speaking about this
is to refer to the freedom of the will
in the same way that a convenient way
and almost unavoidably convenient way
to speak about how one gets from a to b
is to say that the car was the way
in which they got from a to b none of
this is to
detract from the fact that i think that
sam does a
very good summary and overview even an
explanation
of the traditional debate as it's been
had
for centuries certainly decades but i
must say that i do
think deutsche takes us beyond that i've
tried to explain this concept of
emergence in the copper atom argument
elsewhere that if we want to explain
why the copper atom is at the tip of the
nose of winston churchill statue in
parliament
square we have to invoke these higher
level
concepts this idea of war and
culture and respect these things are
abstract
but they are real and they cause
physical events
in reality and of course what a person
is
a person as a universal explainer
not grappling with any of this when
dismissing something
like free will means the debate is stuck
in the past stuck some decades ago
before
these new philosophical and scientific
understandings
have been found and explained and
explored
i think that the traditional way of
framing
the debate about free will in terms of
determinism
versus free will or in terms of
compatibilism in the traditional sense
is all
colored by a particular world view
a different world view and that's not
sam's fault
it's not daniel dennett's fault because
that's the
default that's the way in which people
have always
thought about these ideas sam
says in his podcast that you're not
herself
towards the end there he says you're
part of the stream
rather than being separate to it but you
can
be both failing to draw distinctions in
the world is precisely the same error
as the error of the person who says well
it's not the car that gets you from a to
b
after all relativity says that there's
no absolute motion
that one may as well say the universe is
moving around you
rather than you moving through the
universe or that
trees don't exist or that birds don't
exist
because it's all just one unified whole
of physical reality
although that's true we can still make
meaningful distinctions
and one meaningful distinction is the
existence
of the self sam tries to use
also this thought experiment
about picking a film
but if you sit quietly reflect
and think of your favorite film he asks
you to pause and really reflect on what
that
experience is like as a matter
of subjectivity now
when i do this of course a random film
will pop into my
head as it will to yours because we've
been given no other instructions other
than
pick a film pick a film any film
now there is no good reason why we
should pick any film so it should be
unsurprising when we
don't find a good reason for picking a
film
that it seems like a free choice for
which
there is no reason because we've not
been asked to provide one
but what does the picking well what does
the picking there is a
mental coin flip it is kind of random
and that doesn't mean that we do or do
not have free will it all states
very little but now i want you to try
another kind of
introspection i want you to reflect
and think not of a random film i want
you to think of
the best film and when i say the best
film i mean the film that you
judge to be the best film
think now what's the best film
i've got one in my mind now
it's not so important what the film is
but what's important is the fact that
i've said what is the best film
and you will have criteria
now the criteria that you have maybe
you enjoyed it the most it may be that
it has been critically acclaimed the
most
awarded the most it may be a combination
of all these things
it may have emotionally affected you the
most it may be something that is
poignant because you grew up with it
there could be any number of reasons
why you've picked that film
but you should have a reason for picking
that film
it won't be simply an arbitrary
random choice the experience
of trying to come up with an explanation
why that film is your best film
your choice for best film is a very
individual thing it's a
thing that reveals something about the
existence
of self yourself because it will be
unique
to you your reasons will not be like
other people's reasons your film
will not be like other people's films
necessarily the arguments that arise
in order for you to explain where you
challenged
why it's the best film will be unique to
you you will create them
on the spot and that will reveal to you
what you are you're an explainer you're
someone
who is able to generate some kind of
creative piece of knowledge about what
the best
film is this is a different experience
now
sam might want to say but you're not
choosing what those explanations are
and all i can say here is that we must
differ on that point
because then what is doing the choosing
if not me
he might say well these ideas these
explanations are coming
unbidden into your mind things have to
stop somewhere
should we expect an infinite regress
that if i
uh samurai addresses this actually that
if i
can't choose the explanations that arise
in my mind
or the ideas that arise in my mind i
can't choose
to choose the ideas in my mind either
that's all fair what other alternative
could there be
it has to stop somewhere and it stops
with you
and that stopping is actually where it
originates
ideas originate somewhere they originate
in your mind
they are a part of your mind they're not
identical to you
you are the thing doing the generating
of the ideas
how does this work we don't know we
don't have a fully fled
scientific theory of how ideas arise in
the mind
if we did we could write down a recipe
for how this has done an algorithm
and we could program computers to do it
as well we could have creative computers
but we can't do that yet we don't know
how
ideas arise in the mind but we know that
they do
ideas arise in the mind they arise via a
process of creativity
in the minds of conscious people how
we don't know now is this a free choice
yes because you can choose
not to think of anything if you want you
can choose to think of different things
now if someone says to you don't think
of a white elephant of course you're
going to think of a white elephant
but that's just to say there are various
forces
impinging upon our minds at any given
time
one of which is the outside world and
one of which are our own minds
and our minds are sort of attracted
hither and this
towards the external world and towards
an introspection
upon our own subjectivity we can do both
because we're problem solvers we both
look outwards to solve problems about
external reality
and inwards about what's going on in our
own minds
now sam is quick to say that giving up
on the notion of free will
has great moral benefits one of which is
being
free from feeling the need to hate
others
because you don't think that they're
worthy of blame now i already don't
think that we need to hate people
or that we need to in any technical
sense
blame the person i have a subtle
difference here
people do what they do because of the
ideas that they hold
now there is some responsibility for
holding the ideas that you have
and you should reflect upon your own
ideas and if you're not a reflective
person if you're not
choosing to think about the ideas that
you have there's some culpability on
your part
for not being a reflective person of
course sam might say well you don't get
to choose to be a reflective person
there's all sorts of ways in which you
might have been brought up
due to luck and so you're not
blameworthy
for not being a reflective person and i
can agree with this
but that still doesn't mean that if you
are a reflective person that if you do
know you should be a reflective person
and then choose not to be a reflective
person
then you are somehow innocent of what i
might say is the sin
of choosing not to carefully consider
your thoughts and actions
but the hazard here the moral hazard
that this entire world view
of free will doesn't exist introduces
that otherwise wouldn't be there
is that everything is reduced to luck
and sam puts a primacy upon
luck he says that essentially
there's good luck and there's bad luck
it's nothing to do with you and your
choices because well
ultimately it's not you that make the
choices anyway and of course you don't
really
properly exist as a self all your
efforts
are about luck because you're lucky to
be
the kind of person to put in effort or
not this ends up having
terrible moral consequences and terrible
political consequences because what it
means is
that lazy people are not ultimately
responsible for their laziness and so
should you choose to be lazy
ultimately well it's not your fault
you can be lazy you can choose to sit on
the couch and do nothing at all
and indeed we should all be quite
compassionate
about the fact that you've made that
choice we see that today more and more
and i think it's becoming
really the prevailing view of how we
should
see one another in society that everyone
is to a large extent a victim of their
circumstance
they're lucky the wealthy people are
merely by good fortune
lucky and the people who have very
little
are merely by good by bad fortune
unlucky
there are many situations in which luck
can explain
rather a large amount of what is going
on in people's lives
no doubt people born in sub-saharan
africa
are unlucky people born in california
are for the most part rather more lucky
by comparison
but two people brought up in roughly the
same area
with roughly the same amount of wealth
who end up going on
to make different choices one of whom
ends up
wealthy healthy happy and wise and one
of whom
ends up becoming a violent criminal we
should be able to explain this not
merely in terms of luck
but primarily and largely in terms of
their
choices and ideas their efforts and the
energies that they choose to put in to
their
output and into their work it comes down
to who they are
as people now sam makes a lot about
charles whitman's tumor
which is supposed to be proof positive
that hardware problems of that kind
must always cause certain software
problems but what i want to say
is that charles whitman had every chance
to tell the police what he was going to
do before he did it
there was nothing in the tumor that
contained sufficient information
to tell him not to warn the police about
what he was doing or to
self-isolate or anything else like that
but just because you have a compulsion
to be violent does not mean that you
must necessarily be violent you can take
steps to not be
lots of people have the compulsion to do
things that
they shouldn't do and choose not to do
it it doesn't matter how strong the
compulsion is
i don't understand that at all really
lots of people
feel like they want to do bad things
lots of people choose to do those bad
things and others
with precisely similar emotions
feelings sensations proclivities choose
not to
because of the ideas that they have
the grizzly bear is raised and the
grizzly bear
thought experiment is well the grizzly
bear
attacks you and you run away so
apparently you don't have any free will
because you're you're
you're fearful while the grizzly bear
also has no free will and is not blamed
for attacking you should not be blamed
for attacking you
i agree the bear should not be blamed
for attacking you the bear
is a mindless creature literally
mindless in
my world view i would i would suggest
and that is why
by the way being literally mindless it's
not a moral agent
we can argue about whether or not
therefore this means
the grisly bear not having free will not
having the capacity to
create knowledge to understand ideas
whether or not the bear is actually able
to suffer
in the sense that people can suffer
that's a whole other story
but in sam's story about the grizzly
bear
attacking the person there doesn't seem
to be any
way in which there is a distinction made
a fundamental distinction made between
the grizzly bear
and the person that if neither of them
has
free will then what is fundamentally the
difference between
the grizzly bear and the person the
grizzly bear is just doing what its
jeans tell it to do to attack someone
and the person is just running away
because it's fearful apparently the
genes are telling the person to run away
so neither has free will what's the
difference
i sense that what sam might want to say
is something like well the person's more
intelligent
that on the continuum of intelligence
between
amoeba fish squirrels
bears higher apes and humans the bear
and the person aren't that different
they're just different
in quantity of intelligence i want to
say there's a difference in quality
there is a black and white difference a
an infinite difference one can explain
nothing about the universe that's the
bear
and one in principle can explain
everything about the universe
that's the human the person this quality
of being able to explain the world
around you
to have experiences of the world around
you and to
incorporate them into a model of the
universe around you
provides you also with the capacity to
choose among different explanations
this capacity to choose also known as
free will
is what separates us from every other
entity in the universe this is what
makes people categorically different
sam talks about putting people in prison
that even if people don't have free will
and so
should not be blamed for the evil they
do nonetheless we need to put them in
prison well i couldn't agree more and i
agree with him on this point
that prison is not a place of
retributive justice it's not a place
in order to punish people it's a place
hopefully
to keep the rest of us safe from these
violent people and hopefully
to rehabilitate these people to change
them into people who will not do violent
harm to the rest of us
ideally that's what prison is about so i
agree with him on that
and then sam segues into talking about
compatibilists and what he says
compatibilists do
is to kind of conjure
atlantis into existence and then point
to sicily and say that
sicily really exists well this begs the
question
he's essentially saying first recognize
that atlantis doesn't exist it's a
mythological island
now this is what freewill is like well
no
not at all what any compatibilist would
say
contra to this point is do you know what
look at sicily over there it really
exists now what you sam harris are doing
is saying that sicily over there that
doesn't really exist that's atlantis
it's a mythological place
it never has existed it's always been a
part of myth
and you can point to it as much as you
like but and although everyone else
thinks they have an experience of sicily
it doesn't really exist it's a
mythological place
that begs the question as well and i
think that atlanta story
gets us anywhere sam also says that
compatibilists
identify themselves with the totality of
their thoughts or experiences
and this is false i do not do this and i
think many others
don't do this either i i am at pains to
say that we have
ideas we are not identical to ideas
we are universal explainers our
fundamental
the fundamental quality of what a person
is is
that we create we generate explanations
we model the rest of reality around us
this is
what we try to do we try to understand
stuff and comprehend stuff
now the particular things that we do
comprehend that's not what makes us us
it's the capacity to do that so the
particular ideas that we have at any
given point in time
doesn't make us us it sort of helps to
form our personality
but not our personhood our personhood is
derived from
our capacity to create ideas rather than
being identical to any ideas
so i'm not to be identified with my the
totality of my body or the totality of
my thoughts
sam says that you are no more
responsible for the structure of your
brain
than your height okay this is true as
far as it goes
but the structure of your brain is not
what makes
you you it's the structure of your mind
this is a category error the difference
is
everything we are not hardware we are
software
and the software is infinitely malleable
i could get into that i won't suffice to
say
that in remark you know it's infinitely
malleable i'm not saying that it's easy
to make it to change everything about
your mind
it can be very difficult to change even
small parts about your mind
and with four minutes to go in the
podcast sam says that he wants to bring
things back to
direct experience there's that phrase
the key phrase the key phrase
that permeates much of sam harris's
philosophy and i have great respect for
sam
but this appealed direct experience
is an area that has plagued philosophers
for
millennia and sam's area is the same
as theirs we do not have direct
experience of the external world
and we do not have direct experience
of our own mind and this might seem too
clever by half but it's true you
interpret
what is going on in your mind you
interpret your thoughts
and then you come up with an explanation
of what's going on and that can include
something as naked as the experience of
meditating and having the full
experience
of pure consciousness and when you have
that experience it's merely an
experience
an experience that must be interpreted
and then turned later
into words that you explain to other
people no matter how clear
what kind of clarity you think you have
in the moment
that is not a reason to say that
therefore for certain
that experience means something really
exists in the universe you need
something more than that
you need a good explanation and i'm
giving you a good explanation about what
the self is
the self is that thing which generates
explanations
and you can switch that off at times and
when you do
you have the experience of not having a
self
but that doesn't mean that you are not a
self it just means that for that moment
you're able to switch off your mind and
not have any thoughts
and that's different kind of experience
but it doesn't provide any deep
insight into the true nature of reality
it's rather like switching off all the
lights in your room
not seeing anything at all and
concluding on that basis that therefore
the universe has literally disappeared
of course it hasn't and let's just end
on note that um
sam is a great proponent of the mystery
of consciousness
that the mystery of consciousness is
perhaps as great a mystery as the
existence
of the universe itself the existence of
existence itself
but he dismisses the mystery of free
will rather too quickly
and i think that these two errors are
tied up together i think that they're
both mysteries they're both very
interesting topics to explore and they
might actually ultimately be the same
and i just want to observe that this is
similar to how daniel dennett
thinks that consciousness is kind of
more easily understood than people think
but on the other hand free will is
rather easily understood
they're kind of mirror images of each
other in this way
one thinking the consciousness is a deep
mystery and the other not
one thinking that free will is a kind of
interesting question
and the other not jaren lanier talks
about this as well about how
when a philosopher denies one area of
the mystery of the world the other tends
to crop up
unbidden by them so if you tend to
dismiss the mystery of whatever
the nature of time is the nature of the
self
tends to crop up unbidden in your
ontology
okay i think i've talked more than long
enough about that for now
until next time bye-bye